We're going to go into public session, and we've got 20 minutes with
you.
Obviously, that includes time for questions, you're very well aware.
So just keep that in mind.
And committee, it looks like we'll have some photos taken, just FYI.
So stop slouching. Yeah. Stop slouching and- No ...
eating your muffins or whatever. Yeah.
Welcome to the Education and Workforce Select Committee, Camilla and Greg.
Your members' bill, Modern Slavery Bill. We've got 20 minutes with you.
I'm sure you've worked out how you want to slice that up.
So we'll hand it over to you now. And please, I know there will be questions, so
keep that in mind.
Thank you. Well, thank you very much for having us and for
taking on this bill. I think it's
probably worthwhile us just reflecting on how we got here,
which is we had the vast majority of the House decide to
progress this as a members' bill, and I think that shows how
important this issue is, and action on this issue is for
the entire Parliament. So I want to acknowledge those
members who are present today who assisted
us and took this decision with us to prioritize
action on modern slavery for New Zealand.
I think it's important to go over about how the bill
was drafted, because I think that will probably set the scene for the
way in which the committee decides to
address the bill. So,
members will be aware that there was previously a Modern Slavery
Leadership Advisor Group that was set up with business, and that modern
slavery legislation has already been implemented in
countries like the United Kingdom and Australia.
And so it was very much, I think, the view of many
people in New Zealand that New Zealand should be taking
issues of trafficking, of servitude,
of indentured labor within our supply chain and identifying
those as a serious issue.
For various different reasons, and I won't use our time going over
the exact reasons, it became clear to us that this was
not going to be progressing as a government initiative.
And because of the importance of this issue,
we thought that we may be able to find a way to bring
it to the House. And so I think the reason I mention it is not so
much to make the political point that this isn't a government bill.
It's more to say that this committee has a lot of work to do in
terms of the way that this bill was drafted.
And so, Greg and I were very lucky to work with
some incredibly talented
experts from different fields, from private sector
organizations, NGOs, people that were involved in the Modern Slavery
Leadership Advisory group, people who practice in that area
to be able to draft this bill. But it hasn't been
drafted in the usual way that a bill of this complexity would be drafted in
order to get to a select committee.
And
so I think it is a really good bill, but I think certainly it
would benefit from the expertise of the advisors, which
I see have been appointed, and also the
specialist drafters who will certainly have
some suggestions. And so I think in terms of this committee, this is really
opportunity for the select committee to do what I think select committees
wereDesigned to do- Mm-hmm ... which is to really look at this
legislation and legislate and build a regime that's really going
to deliver for New Zealand in terms of
our values as a nation. Mm-hmm. So we know that we don't
stand for slavery at home. We've had legislation on that point for a long
time. We know that we don't stand for slavery,
and if we can possibly tackle it in other jurisdictions, that's what
we should do. So,
the bill that you see before you, and I do have a copy with me,
is
our attempt, our best attempt, to work with those
outside of this building to produce a bill
which is fit for purpose and will provide a good starting point.
But this committee will have a lot of work to do, and yet we know that there are a
lot of experts who have worked on legislation in
other jurisdictions who will want to submit, and our
urge to you would be to listen to those expert submissions.
We know that there will be big companies who already report on modern
slavery in other countries that are similar, like Australia. Mm-hmm.
And we would really like you to listen to those companies because we want
this to be a successful scheme for New Zealand. Mm-hmm.
We want businesses to be able to,
if there's a way of them saving time and not having to duplicate- Mm-hmm ...
efforts that they do for work they do in Australian reporting to New
Zealand reporting-
Mm-hmm ... then that's beneficial.
Because the key thing that we want to see is the identification of issues in the
supply chain and hopefully the remedy of that. Yeah.
Of course, this bill doesn't go that far. It's a reporting bill. Mm-hmm.
But many companies do use that
in order to change
their practices as well. So
I think probably we did discuss this before we came here in terms of what we
wanted to say, and a big message would be if it's possible to
find a way to make the legislation as workable as possible, if
there's things we haven't thought of, that we would encourage the committee to
implement those. Alignment with Australia, obviously- Mm-hmm ...
we have a lot of companies that- Mm-hmm ...
this would apply to who work in both New Zealand and Australia. Mm-hmm.
We
don't want to see any unnecessary-- We would like to see
steps that provide New Zealand with a robust regime that may be different,
if appropriate. But if there's unnecessary differences that just
create
issues, then that's not our objective.
The other thing that came up, and has come up a lot, and I'm sure will come up in
submissions, is the idea of mandatory due diligence and also the
rights of victims in New Zealand. Now, there is due
diligence mentioned in this bill- Mm-hmm ...
but
I suppose there's,
and I'm not the best person to explain it, but there is a technical
approach to due diligence which
advocates in this field believe is the best way to run
a modern slavery regime, and I'm sure you'll hear submissions about that, and I
encourage you to question and understand what a mandatory due diligence
part of this bill would be. Mm-hmm.
The other thing which is,
I suppose,
something that probably from my side would've liked to see
more protections for victims of modern slavery within New Zealand as well.
That's hasn't formed the major part of this bill, but I think hearing
from submitters about if there's things that we can do to
make it more likely that victims of modern slavery report
that they have been victims of modern slavery and find access to
justice, then that would be also extremely beneficial.
So
Greg may want to add a few comments, but just to thank the committee very much
for your work. This is going to be
work for the committee in terms of hearing these submissions and working on
legislation. But I think a real opportunity to be part of something that is quite
historic and meaningful and will hopefully lead to
a world where we no longer accept these types of terrible,
exploitative working conditions, no matter where they are in the world, in any
country. Mm-hmm. That is our aim, and we really look forward to working with you on
it. Yeah. Thank you. No, well said. Greg, did you want to add?
Yeah, I'll just echo just a couple of points there.
One is around probably the only advantage of New Zealand being a little
late to the game on this is that we don't have to reinvent the wheel.
Mm-hmm.
We can learn from other jurisdictions' experiences.
Yeah.
And as Camilla mentioned, particularly across Australia with them having had it in
place for seven years, and then as recently as 18 months ago, having
done a comprehensive review of their own system, and the changes that they've
recommended there haven't yet been implemented.
So keep in mind in terms of getting that balance right between
aligning with Australia, but aligning to
where they are hopefully going, or maybe even where
we go might help them to go there. But that alignment would be massive.
I think you guys are aware that of the roughly 1,000 companies that will
be required to report under this regime, 300 are already
doing so-
Mm-hmm
... because of their commercial relationships with Australia.
Yeah.
And learning from those 300 will be massively helpful.
So for example, I met with Freightways a couple of weeks ago.
They're already spending about $800,000 a year on complying with the
Australian legislation.
Wow.
So it would be wonderful if we could set up the New Zealand
regime in a way that doesn't add that financial regulatory
burden to them, that we can actually leverage from that.
Yeah.
They're very enthusiastic about this, and I certainly encourage them to submit.
Also just echoing Camilla's point around the
unusual drafting process, which is obviously part of a private member's
bill. And
you will hear from them both. We were particularly fortunate to work
with Rebecca Strong from World Vision and
Becky Kingi, who's now with ANZ Social Justice area.
The two of them are very experienced lawyers in this area.
Mm-hmm.
So
they actually do have the skills to have helped prepare this kind of
legislation.
But obviously outside of the normal PCO process.
So they'll both be submitting to this.
Yeah. And again, just finally echoing, as Camilla said, that
this-The actual select committee, the process that you guys are going to
run over the next few weeks is
going to be absolutely critical ensuring where this legislation lands, as opposed,
I'm aware that often select committees are
sort of reviewing a piece of work that's been already pretty much
settled. In this case, there is the opportunity to really
improve this legislation, tighten it up, and ensure that it's best fit for
purpose. So thank you.
Brilliant. Cool. Okay. Just quickly from me before we move into
other questions. We've obviously already had some brilliant submissions and really
helpful, and I appreciate your point about being really keen and open
to align with Australia. We've already heard about just lining up with their
reporting timeline so that they can effectively do the same report and-
Mm
... distribute it both ways.
Just in terms of the online trading space,
do you anticipate there's going to be
challenges there from what you've seen with Australia?
The access, I guess,
online for us to purchase from any business from any part of the world,
but
relatively under-regulated. Do you have sort of any thoughts or views on-
Well, the burden will still be with the company that's supplying such
products-
Yeah
... regardless of where the consumer's accessing them.
Yeah.
So, 100%, but in terms of just the ability to regulate,
if you've seen anything, learned anything from Australia, UK.
Yeah, I think it will really come down to kind of the definitional
aspect of how that works, and it might be that it is
difficult for some companies to do this work.
Yeah.
And I think it is meant to be difficult in a way because-
Yeah
... it's complex. So I think
I wouldn't shy away from including it because sometimes it might be
hard or a-
Mm
... company-- It'd be interesting to hear from some of the companies that do report
into Australia. What do they do when they come across a dead end?
Right. Right.
I think the attempt of finding out what the supply chains
are and-
Mm
... that exercise in and of itself can be quite helpful.
So-
Yeah
... it might be that they don't find everything
that is possible to discover, but-
Mm
... the process of the best endeavors is something I
think will be more valuable than what's required at the moment in New Zealand.
Great. Thank you. And we've got a question from Phil and then a question from Carl.
Yeah.
Thanks for bringing it to this committee.
I think it's going to be great for us to work on it, particularly with the high
level of cross-party support.
Mm.
I think we can really get our teeth into it.
Phil's looking forward to working with Carl again.
Yeah, I know. It's been so long.
Finally. Finally.
It's been so long.
Sorry. Sorry.
Some way.
Just restore some decorum.
Yeah.
What's your sense,
now that you've got the benefit of
departmental officials and PCO, what's your sense of the
aspects of the bill as it currently stands that would most benefit
from
drafting and policy-
Mm
... now?
Given you've talked about the unusual process-
Yeah
... thus far, what are the aspects that you think we should really focus on
to strengthen?
Yeah.
I suppose our objective is really to have the best piece of legislation
possible. So, there probably are areas that
could
have a bit more focus, and I think
the areas that I spoke about that might not be covered in the bill-
Mm
... certainly that we would like some advice on that in terms of victims' rights.
I guess, though, we would want a bill which is really
workable and as a priority, so wouldn't say any of it
is not open to scrutiny.
Mm.
But
yeah, the way that it's been drafted, I suppose one aspect of it that would be
interesting to see is,
it does leave it open to kind of governments in the future to look at the
regime and review it.
Mm.
And whether that is--
I think that will be really key as well because what we want is,
obviously, I know that this committee will do a really great job, but of course, we
can never
ensure perfection.
Mm.
And so having that ability to review-
Mm
... the legislation, I do think is really important.
So hopefully they'll be able to give some advice on
those elements of it too.
Mm.
And we have a supplementary from Pam Shear.
Yeah. Thanks. So a supplementary to that.
You said you want to see that the bill is workable.
So in the current state, are you saying that the bill is not workable?
Because you have said this a few times, that you're looking forward to select
committee working on this bill, and in your speech also, you said this is not a
perfect bill, and now you're saying
you want to see that this bill is workable.
Can you elaborate on that?
Yeah, I don't think any piece of legislation
that is passed and in place can necessarily claim perfection.
And so I think that at the moment, the bill, from our
perspective as people who are not experts in this field, is
workable. But certainly what we're looking to the committee to do is to
improve that workability and to make sure that the
framework that we have
designed and put in place as part of this bill is actually going to
be something that is,
when it applies to New Zealand companies, which it will, that they are going to be
able to utilize to the best extent.
Mm.
And I suppose we should also add, we've been incredibly heartened to see the
support of the business community for this bill.
Mm-hmm.
I think it's been really amazing to see the
non-governmental organizations focusing on human rights and businesses
really on the same page in terms of wanting a regime in New Zealand to start with-
Yeah
... and wanting a regime that's going to be really delivering the
types of scrutiny and the types of change that we would like to see.
Just in the interest of time, sorry, Pam Shear, we're going to move on.
No, we've got four more questions we've got to get through. So Carl.
Thanks very much, Chair. Thank you for the work that you've put into this.
Really looking forward to hearing the submissions, and thanks for
your confidence in our committee making it a better bill through the process.
Best letting go.
As
you know, I've sat on the board of a business that has
reported under the Australian regime, and so my particular area of
interest through this process is going to be in how we don't end up in a
space where directors and boards are doing more
than necessary-
Mm-hmm
... because of concern around where the gray line is around what they are supposed
to do.
Yeah.
Interested if you've got any reflections for the committee on where we could look
in the rule, in the-Bill as it stands around those
concerns or any particular organizations that you
think will submit to the committee that we should watch out for, obviously
alongside the Institute of Directors, which I'm going to be particularly interested
in there.
Yes.
Because we don't want to do something that takes-
Yeah
... that 800,000 you referred to for-
... Freightways to
a million or whatever-
Correct
... just because there's too much gray.
Yeah. Correct. Yeah. And this is what I was going to speak to on the last line of
questioning as well, which is, it's that area of the
legislation that instructs what it is that must be done
and how. So the
specificity of what we're asking of the company
is going to be key, so that there. And again, this is
the conversations that I've had with companies.
This is one of their biggest asks back is just, can you be
really clear on-
Yeah
... what's required of us?
Mm.
And to the degree that standardized templates can be used, it's
very clear in terms of where it sits within the public service.
Yeah.
They just want clarity,
so
that not everyone is having to work it out over the first two or three years
and incurring unnecessary costs in doing so. Yeah.
Thank you. A question from Teanaru Toriono.
Yeah. Kia ora. Thank you very much for your mahi in bringing this to the house in
the way that you did. That was a
really amazing thing that you guys have done.
10 out of 10.
I'm interested in
some of the comments you made around
what the potential is here.
With members' bill, you're often constrained because it's just you guys and
some officials that you can get along to volunteer as well.
But then you were also talking about, well, actually, because all parties are
coming to this in a particular way, there is an opportunity to do other
things.
Mm.
So I was wondering
what some of those other spaces might be.
There is constraints when you've got a members' bill with physical
constraints that
make it difficult, but have you thought about other things?
Because I know that when the submissions come in, they'll want to have
stronger legislation, things that you might not be able to-
Yes
... to give them.
Yes.
So I was wondering, have you got a sense of the kind of low-hanging fruit that we
could be focusing on in this process?
Yeah, these were things that Camilla spoke to before, which is probably why
seeing this as the framework
that
could evolve in the future,
rather than having to deliver everything right now.
I think that's, in other words, not overreaching at this point, but
also keeping very much in mind where this could
evolve based on our own experiences, but also on all our
fellow trading companies. So yeah, the areas
that Camilla touched on before would be the key ones.
The other thing, too, to keep in mind is that the modern slavery reporting
sits within the context of a sort of a four-prong approach
to having a comprehensive approach to modern slavery, both domestically and
internationally. And one of those parts is already well underway.
It's coming through in terms of the Crimes Act amendments.
But the other two areas,
one of them deals with the potential
for some kind of slavery commissioner, and that also will be, just an eye
on the time, we may not get to that now, but that would be something to consider as
well during this process of where that's going to sit, because both of us mentioned
this in our first speeches. But the
discussions that have been had with the Human Rights Commission around the
potential for, and this is actually mentioned in the bill in its current
form as well, the potential for one of the deputy human
rights commissioners-
Yeah
... to actually have this as an added portfolio.
But then the fourth part is the work that Minister Costello
has been doing and is continuing to do around the coordination
and support of services for identified victims in New Zealand.
That also feeds back into what Camilla was mentioning before.
So helpful, I think, to continue to see this part,
this particular work around reporting within the context of that
wider frame.
Yeah.
And we have a final question from Grant Robertson.
Yeah. Congratulations on it. Well done.
So you've highlighted a couple of key areas, Greg.
Just the one Carl raised about make it clear the outcomes
for people. Learning from the Australian experience
that's been through a review, what are the key areas, one or two, that we need to
really be looking at really closely to make sure we get
right in our first go at this?
I think one of the things with the Australian review is, I guess we wouldn't want
to put in place a New Zealand regime which is identical
to a regime in Australia that then gets changed-
Yeah
... really quickly, and so I think that's a really tricky thing for this committee.
One of the options I know that has been discussed is potentially getting
some advice on how the Australian regime works and what changes are likely to be
put in place.
Mm-hmm.
I think that will be really key, and I know that's a little bit anticipatory, but-
Mm
... I think we really want a regime which is going to
be working long-term, in a way that's not
behind, I suppose, international comparators.
So that's-
Mm
... it's a tricky-
Yeah
... thing for the committee to look at.
But I certainly think people who are familiar with the Australian regime,
the review they're doing, and what's likely to change, if anything, would be
really key information for the committee.
And the timelines on the Aussie review?
I think it's-
Yeah. Well, it was completed December before last, and it's
still in play in terms of them looking at what they'll do.
Oh.
This is where the discussion with the Australian commissioner-
Yeah, and we're set to hear from him.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's going to be pivotal.
So we're really pleased that you've decided to do that.
Yeah.
Because I think it's difficult for us to obviously say what
they will do as a result of those recommendations.
Mm-hmm.
But they-
The- Clarifying question from Chris.
Yeah, quick supplementary to that.
Is there any way to align it so that we would bring our
regime in place at the same time as they make those
changes?
That would be brilliant if possible.
And this is what I've mentioned earlier on, what I've just spoken to there.
Yeah, if we can, yes. If we're sort of coming in from here, they're moving to
there, choose an intersection point that's sort of here rather than-
Yeah. Love the visual, Greg
... coming back here.
Great.
Yeah. And when we first drafted this bill, we were aware that the review had
been completed. We were aware that there was likely to be changes, and we tried
to kind of consider that in terms of our drafting.
So you're open-minded to a commencement date that is
You know, well-
Yeah, I think it's more the terms of the
legislation-
Yeah. Right. Okay
... rather than, necessarily starting at the same time
Yeah. When it starts. Yeah.
Makes sense.
That's helpful. Yeah. Thank you both. Thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
We'll go out of public.
We
are here for the collective of
petitions for Home Economics technology teachers'
curriculum. So we have, this morning, and we'll hear
from three different submitters in succession for 10 minutes
each. So we'll just go through that process.
First this morning, we have our Home Economics and Technology Teachers Association
of New Zealand. We have Tina Williams and Sue Parks.
And we are set to hear from you for 10 minutes.
Please come to the table, and that does include time for
questions, which I'm sure there will be questions from the committee, so bear that
in mind. And we'll hand over to you now.
Tina Williams, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today about an issue that is literally about nourishing our
nation
now and for generations to come. I'm Tina Williams, and with me
is Sue Parks, representing the Home Economics and Tech- not-
Technology Teachers Association of New Zealand, called HETANZ.
We are also supported today by Sarah Worth from the International
Federation of Home Economics,
our HETANZ president, Adrian Reeves, alongside Nicola Potts,
Sue Hannaway, and Henry Soper, as well as other supporters.
We have limited time to talk
for you today, but we draw your attention to our written, more technical
submission
in support of our presence, as well as other relevant documents.
We previously brought a petition to Parliament backed by rigorous
evidence-based research.
We point to the vital data from Nutrition Society in a highly
compelling student-voiced paper advocating for what we are here to
fight for today.
We acknowledge the Ministry of Education's February response or
submission in response to our petition.
Also, further material was forwarded 24 hours ago.
Our request to you is simple, logical, and urgent.
Home Economics, specifically food and nutrition, must stay, remain
a standalone subject from years one through to year 13.
It needs its own specialized curriculum, its own assessments, and its
own resources. Right now, New Zealand has a world-class Home
Economics curriculum that is highly respected on the global stage,
and in fact, we are looking forward to welcoming over 1,000
home economists to New Zealand in 2028 for our
recently won bid to host the International Federation of Home Economics
World Congress. Yet, the Ministry of Education is on
the verge of dismantling Home Economics due to a fundamental
misunderstanding. They view home economics as something that
can be sliced up and scattered into other subjects.
It cannot. Home Economics is not just a classroom
subject, it is a powerful societal equalizer.
Let's clear up the biggest misconception.
The Ministry has suggested that the core concepts of Home Economics
are already covered across other proposed subjects. They are not.
Mm.
There are three completely distinct areas here.
Home Economics, hospitality, and food technology.
Mm.
They do not overlapWith what they're trying to
teach, and their skills are entirely different.
Food technology is about product development,
manufacturing, and food science.
It's the mechanics of manipulating ingredients, emulsifiers, and
additives. It is not about human health.
Hospitality is purely industry-focused.
It's about standard operating procedures, commercial service,
and meeting immediate consumer needs.
Home economics, food and nutrition, however, is a rigorous
discipline in its own right. It uses a
proactive, positive approach to well-being.
It isn't an industry assembly line.
It's about learning how to live, thrive, and
sustain health and well-being.
Trying to force food and nutrition inside food
technology simply does not work, as they are completely different
subjects. Food and nutrition, as a subject, sits
under the concept of health.
Unfortunately, recent ministry documents revealed a
subjective we think approach rather than credible
research or consultation with experts like HETANS.
This process has lacked transparency or
consultation.
The ministry claims that under the new proposed health curriculum, students
will get practical hands-on learning.
But if you look at the draft curriculum, there is zero practical
hands-on cooking included. Instead, they are forcing
nutrition into health classes in an entirely illogical
way. For example, the draft curriculum pairs nutrition issues
directly with sexual and reproductive health discussions.
How does a student learn the life-changing applied skills of
nutrition by just sitting at a desk having a hypothetical
debate?
There is also a myth being circulated that home economics is not a
current NCEA subject, or that it isn't fully developed.
Let us correct the record.
Food and nutrition was developed in 2024.
It just has not been properly implemented by the ministry.
It is a highly successful level two and level three
NCEA subject right now. It is a university
entrance-approved subject that awards critical reading
and writing credits with scholarship available.
The ministry also claims there is limited participation in the
subject, yet they have not produced a single thread of data for
student participation in years one to 10.
We can tell you from the ground level that the demand is massive.
At my school alone,
60 students take health with food at level one, compared to just
18 taking health.
Another school has 123 students at level one and 100
students at each of level two and level three,
while health is not even offered. The students want this.
The families need this.
Another massive error in the ministry's logic is how they view
practical skills. Their documentation states that cooking,
hygiene, and preparation are already assessed by unit standards
recognized by industry. But those are
hospitality
standards. They are meant for commercial kitchens, not everyday health,
applied nutrition, along with sustainability.
In food and nutrition, a practical lesson is not about learning how to
chop
an onion for a business. It's an applied science.
For instance, when students look at a
food-related ethical dilemma, they're not just talking about
it. They're actively cooking, analyzing nutrient
absorption, calculating
costs, and understanding the social environmental impact on what
they put on our plate. These Anzac biscuits we have
brought for you today represent exactly what home economics
is.
Thank you so much.
They represent history-
You try them.
Careful
... nutrition literacy- ... and real-world connection and
social determinants. Home economics are specialized,
trained nutrition educators. A health teacher simply does not
have a specialized nutrition background.
Nice.
If we remove this subject, we destroy a vital
academic pathway.
Home economics leads directly to university degrees and
onto doctorates. We're talking about the future pipeline
for New Zealand's nutritionists, dieticians,
nurses,
public health experts, and food scientists.
The proposed changes completely cut that ladder out from
under our students.
Look at the future-focused Mana Ora Rangatahi
guidelines for eating and well-being recently co-constructed in Hawke's
Bay.
Mm.
They explicitly
show how vital a knowledge-rich, standalone food
and nutrition subject is to the health of our
communities.
New Zealand is currently facing an escalating
multibillion-dollar public health crisis.
Stripping away and marginalizing the one subject that
teaches young people the hands-on practical literacy to
feed themselves healthily and sustainably is a
step backwards New Zealand cannot afford.
The human cost is high. It's simply too high.
International research is screaming for us
to bring home economics back, calling it one of the smartest
investments a society can make.
Let's not look back years from now-And
regret letting it go. Thank you for your time.
Mm.
Ngā mihi nui. We welcome any questions you may
have.
Thank you very much. And we have a question first from Shannen Halbert.
Kia ora, and thank you.
You've run a wonderful campaign.
Thank you.
And when I think of my local schools in Birkenhead and Northcote-
Mm
... it is a very popular subject currently in those schools.
So I'm interested in what's the justification that you have received
from the ministry why this subject is no longer needed.
And if so, what's your response to that?
There's been no responses from the ministry explaining why.
We've got OIA requests in, and
we've had them in since October, and we're still waiting for
responses.
They're just not coming up with any reason at all.
We do not understand, and we do not know the reason.
Yeah.
The transparency is what we're questioning.
Mm.
Consultation and transparency.
Yes.
Yeah.
So I know there hasn't been any consultation.
Mm.
But there hasn't been any response, as you're saying-
No
... since October-
Yes
... to your queries.
Yes.
Thank you.
And my next question we have from Lawrence Yun.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much for coming.
I think what you've highlighted is that there's a lot of
misconception-
Mm
... about what home economics and food and nutrition is, particularly in the 21st
century.
Mm.
I want to check, as a standalone subject-
Mm
... how do you see it potentially develop?
And you mentioned right in the end-
Mm
... in terms of the public health crisis-
... and also the cultural element.
Yeah.
But how do you see that develop? Because certainly with the ministry's
response-
Mm
... they also seem to get it wrong-
... in terms of home economics.
One aspect was the fact that relationships are deeply
embedded currently, particularly in level one curriculum at the moment, and
obviously all the way through, but they're straight. It's particularly well.
And it has the opportunity to be forward-thinking.
We're in need of it
more than ever.
And things like the Garden to Table program could be grown on, and there are
schools already developing, got curriculum such as, and
learning, growing. They create the products with the
food, meals and things like that. And some schools actually have
sister
schools abroad, and they communicate, and how is this day
prepared in that country, et cetera.
Right.
So there's all that cultural sustainability, and
internationally, it is a growing subject, and it's got multiple
names, and it's something the ministry does not understand. Yeah.
Like food system and food sovereignty.
Yeah.
Yeah. I've just been offered a job in the Philippines in a school,
and it's going to be called food ecology.
Thank you-
Exactly
... very, very much.
Yeah.
Firstly, as a former home economic student, really appreciate it, and just
acknowledging the pathways to the workforce.
Thank you.
We do need to move on now to art history.
Another of my favorite subjects.
Thank you for the cookies.
That's all right. You're welcome.
Thank you.
My mother would be very proud.
She was a home ec student in 1958-9, I think, down in Tauranga.
Yeah. It's mainly academic right now at the senior schools-
Yeah
... that's the piece.
Yeah.
Sorry. Can I just say something quickly?
I just wanted to say thank you for all of the effort you've put into it.
I realize I don't have time for a question, but
I'm a huge supporter of nutrition and kids having the ability to cook in
homes and all of that knowledge. So I just want to say a special thank you for the
advocacy and work you've been doing.
I'm so glad you're here.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Right. Thank you, art history. We now have 10 minutes
with you. Bear
with me
to catch up with my documentation.
So we have Celia Hogan and ... No, we don't.
Oh, we've skipped ahead. Sorry.
It's my own fault, but we're agile.
We have Lily Foster and Barbara Ormond.
Thank you.
We have, as you heard, 10 minutes with you,
and that includes time for questions. And as you hear, there are lots of questions.
So, do feel free to highlight the important bits for us and then get into
questions. Thank you.
Thank you.
Art is humanity. It is the gateway into the thoughts of different
groups throughout history. I would not be the person I am today
without this subject.
Art history has taught me to love people even more deeply for
affection carved in a sculpture and paint strokes depicting
strife.
I can connect with people from many historical and cultural
backgrounds through the illustration of the world.
In a planet that prioritizes individualism, we need this connection
more than ever. That is why you should not remove art history from the
high school curriculum.
I will discuss how the skills taught in art history cannot adequately be taught in
other social studies subjects, and will discuss some skills taught in the subject.
Barbara will argue why art history cannot be taught in visual arts.
Then we will open up the questions.
In college, I studied history and art history.
History and classics limits the scope of learning by limiting actors to
states and powerful groups. On the other hand, art history
focuses on the individual artist and how they respond to their environment.
Sometimes in history, it is difficult to understand people's emotions during an
event. Art history fills that gap because an artist's
ideas often reflect those of many groups in society, simply by the way
an artist depicts a face or paints a landscape.
This is important because it builds empathy.
To care about the people of the present, one must care about the people of the
past.
Art history covers movements from a variety of cultures, and hence the historical
context tied to the era.
In a diverse country like Aotearoa, New Zealand, it is important to have
not just an understanding of the events that have taken place throughout history,
but the emotions people have felt.
This would allow one to better engage with the communities, as they would have a
greater appreciation of the struggles groups have faced.
This is because of art's ability to depict more than the observable world, but
emotions, hence one must analyze
it.Art history is special because it takes skills such as
researching, critical thinking, and empathy, and directly applies it to
art.
Students can see the straightforward connection from the skills they have to
real-life applications. Furthermore, these image analysis
skills can be used to navigate the image-proliferated 21st century to
understand the meanings of advertisements, government messaging, and even to
recognize propaganda.
Removing this subject does not account for the people like me who just want to
learn about art. Classics and history simply does not analyze
art the way art history does.
Why remove the choice, remove the jobs, remove the
trans-disciplinary skills, when you can retain a highly respected
subject?
Thank you for the opportunity to explain the importance of art history as a school
subject and to show you why art history needs to remain as a
standalone subject for the future.
First, I want to make it clear that art history is a subject which
clearly addresses the goals of the current government.
It is undoubtedly a knowledge-rich subject.
It can be shown to raise levels of literacy.
It's well-suited to the goals of explicit teaching and is
structured in ways which align with the theories of the science of
learning.
The main argument that seems to be put forward for axing
art history is that it can be absorbed into visual arts, but
this presents difficulties.
The Visual Arts Teachers Association have made it very clear
that they do not believe it's possible to do a good job of including
art history within visual arts due to a lack of time within art
courses and a lack of expertise. Many visual arts
teachers are not qualified to teach art history, so it'll be very
difficult, if not impossible, to achieve a coherent,
knowledge-rich approach to teaching art history within practical
visual arts subjects.
Many students who currently choose to study art history at school
don't take visual arts, so they'll miss out on the opportunity to learn
about art history. And a large number of the current art
history teachers are social science or English teachers, and
they don't teach visual arts. They're specialist art history
teachers. Therefore, there'll be a high impact on both teachers'
jobs and students' access to art history
content.
Removing art history will also impact
on universities. Without students having the opportunity to
discover the wonderment of art history at school, there's
very high chance that universities will struggle to attract students.
This would impact on New Zealand's international reputation in
the art sector and affect the comparative measures of quality of New
Zealand universities within the global tertiary market.
Art history is an immensely valuable subject for future employment
in a range of fields. Those working in the creative arts and industry
sector have let us know that their initial interest in working in the field
often derived from their experiences of learning art history.
For example, Jane Campion, director of "The Piano," has gone on
record saying how important art history was to her.
Art history also leads directly to roles in museums and art
galleries. And a number of my own past students now work as gallery
directors, curators, art educators, art critics.
So art history is such an essential subject.
I reiterate what Lily has said. Art history develops important
knowledge and skills that are not available to the same depth or
richness in other subjects. While art history has been taught
in New Zealand schools for almost 60 years, it
belies its name and is very much a contemporary
subject and vital in the 21st century when we are
constantly bombarded with images.
We need the skills to critically and meaningfully
interpret those visual images
and, of course, to gain the knowledge about societies and to develop
the writing and critical thinking skills
to enable students to persuade us.
And we've got lots of support. We've got 89 letters sent to
the minister, over 80 stories, which you're welcome to have a
copy of.
Yeah.
40 Facebook pages.
Loads of things. Plus, of course, the 9,000
submission.
Thank you. And sorry to give you an indication, but we have got questions, and we
really don't want to lose time. Can I start and just challenge you on a couple of
things?
Mm.
Genuinely, art history was my favorite subject at school, but I was that person
that took art history, art, and painting,
and in fact, design, because it was a separate subject.
And I was in an example where my painting teacher was my art
history teacher. He was duly qualified. He's a wonderful artist himself.
But then I was also in a position where because of the number of subjects being
offered, I then wasn't able to take history and art history at the same time.
So I would challenge that. I would have loved to
have taken painting and art history as a collective subject, and where I could
have learned from that same teacher in both cases.
So can I ask you
how broad your engagement has been with the sector in terms of
representation of where this can work and where it doesn't work,
and that conflict? Because I know you've spoken to the teachers
that have different backgrounds and don't teach
both. Have you got examples of where this is working already?
We've been very closely associated with the Art Educators
Society, and they are saying it is not going to work.
So they don't support the idea of art history being
embedded within visual arts, and they've come out very clearly and
stated that.
Exactly.Thank you. We have a question now from Lawrence Sunam.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much for coming.
As a proud doctoral alumni of history and
humanities, this is something that I'm very passionate about.
One of your many degrees.
But I think I also want to check, because you talk about low
numbers, which is one of the reasons why they wanted to cancel or
remove it as a standalone subject.
But also from my understanding is there's something that the minister has got wrong
about the numbers in terms of the credits
that is allowed. Can I just check, what
did the ministry get wrong? And also, what then
should art history be a standalone subject?
What are some of the next steps for improvement?
Okay. So,
it's the way you say that there's only, or the
minister has said that art history,
not many people take it. Only so many get past 14 credits.
Now, it's a very detailed thing, so I can't go into it, but
it depends how you count the credits.
If you take the numbers that actually entered in art history,
then they are substantial, and they're much greater
than many of the other subjects that have been able to be retained.
And we have a final question from Jenny Anderson online.
Actually, I think Rachel Boyack, who's our spokesperson also
for the arts, is in the room.
Only one of you is participating in this, and we haven't got a whip slip for you.
And I'm just indicating to you, Katie, that it'll be Rachel.
Yes. Sorry, we haven't got a whip slip, so it's you.
Oh, okay, so it's me.
Yeah.
Okay. My question is,
you really laid it out quite clearly that this meets all the requirements of the
minister's knowledge-rich, explicit teaching, all of those
frameworks that have come in. What do you think is the reason,
then, for not giving students the ability to learn
our history through art?
Do you understand why this decision is given?
It seems to meet all the requirements of the new curriculum.
I don't think they've taken that aspect into account, even
understanding really how knowledge-rich it is.
Mm.
I think that they've gone for a practical way
of looking at how they could still keep it or say they've kept it through
keeping it in visual arts, or
putting it into visual arts. But what I've looked at so far
of up to the year 10, which is all that's available, is that it's
very lightweight. It's going to be not coherent.
Thank you. And sorry, just one last one.
Can you just-
We're over time. Sorry. Unfortunately, Jenny. Yeah, appreciate it.
Hey, thank you very much.
Thank you.
And appreciate your agility. I know I bumped you up
one accidentally.
If anybody would like a copy of some of the stories-
Yes, please. Look, you're welcome to table that. Thank you.
We have a few testimonies and postcards as well. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. Thanks, Shannon.
All right. Now, we have Outdoors New Zealand.
We have Celia Hogan and Hamish Buddle.
Thank you very much for joining us.
As you'd heard, 10 minutes, includes time for questions, and we do have
questions, so just make that-
Great.
There's going to be questions.
Cool.
Okay.
Tena koutou katoa. Celia Hogan ahau, co-chair of
Education Outdoors New Zealand.
I want to begin by being very clear.
The proposed curriculum structure fundamentally misunderstands
what outdoor education is, how it works in schools,
how students progress through it, and why students choose
it. And the 53,000 New Zealanders who signed this petition
understood that clearly, too. At times, this
petition has been dismissed as people
misunderstanding the proposed changes.
In fact, it is the exact opposite. People understood exactly
what was at risk of being lost.
Number one, one of our biggest concerns with the proposed subjects
and NCEA changes is the removal of outdoor education at
year 11.
Outdoor education that currently exists at year 11 and forms an
important bridge into years 12 and 13.
Removing year 11 creates a gap in student knowledge,
progression, engagement, and program
continuity.
Number two, outdoor education cannot simply be
absorbed into physical education.
The repeated suggestion that aspects of outdoor education can simply be taught
within PE demonstrates a fundamental misunderstanding of the
difference between the two subjects.
They are distinct disciplines with different knowledge, progression, and
educational outcomes. The proposed year 11 PE
structure is built on PE knowledge.
For example, one proposed learning area focuses on
VO2 max and the body's response to exercise.
That is physical education knowledge.
It is not outdoor education knowledge.
Using outdoor locations to teach PE is not the same as outdoor
education. Chemistry and biology are both taught in a lab,
but we both know, well, we all know, that they are different subjects.
Not all PE teachers are trained or competent to safely teach in outdoor
settings or deliver the specialized knowledge and
skills outdoor education requires.
This is a health and safety concern.
Mm-hmm.
Number three, if outdoor education was truly valued, the
proposed structure would reflect a genuine understanding of the
subject because students are not taking outdoor
education simply to become outdoor instructors.
Last year, over 12,000 students participated in senior
outdoor education across Aotearoa.
Around 3,000 students took outdoor education at year 13
alone, and that is approximately 150
year 13 classes nationally.
Yet fewer than 80 students progressed into level
four vocational outdoor qualifications.The
numbers tell a very clear story. Students are choosing outdoor
education because of its broader educational value
and the real-world capabilities it develops.
And according to the 2023 census, fewer than 2,000
people identified as outdoor instructors or guides
nationally.
Number four, industry skills boards have been tasked with
recommending industry-led subjects to the minister so
she can pick eight. Given that outdoor education is a very
small industry, there is a very real risk that outdoor
education might not be one of those eight, and therefore
disappears from secondary education altogether if
it is not developed as a ministry-led subject.
Number five, outdoor education is valued for far
more than workforce preparation for one
sector.
Throughout our petition process, we heard from doctors,
engineers, pilots, builders, farmers, health
professionals, educators, academics, business owners, and
employers who spoke about the impact of outdoor
education on their confidence, leadership, teamwork,
resilience, problem-solving, and critical thinking abilities.
We are narrowing one of the few places in schooling where young people
authentically practice real-world human capability.
The government claims outdoor education is still valued, yet the structure
being proposed demonstrates a fundamental misunderstanding of what
outdoor education is, how it is taught, and why it
matters. A strong education system should expand the ways young
people can succeed, not narrow them.
Well done.
Tena koutou katoa. Ko Hamish Barber toku ingoa.
I'm the learning area lead for physical education, outdoor education, and health at
Wellington East Girls College. I also work with Eons and teachers as
a regional subject advisor for outdoor education.
I'd like to build on Celia's words and provide some additional context by sharing
what outdoor education currently looks like at our school, and why our
students choose it as part of their pathway.
At Wellington East, we offer our students senior pathways in physical education,
outdoor education, and health within the learning area, and all of these
courses are currently made up of achievement standards that are with a
pathway towards university entrance.
This approach allows us to draw on contexts that are relevant to our
learners as well as our local environment.
As an example, here in Wellington, we're surrounded by the ocean, both our
harbor and our rugged south coast.
Our outdoor education courses reflect this by drawing on these
environments as a focus.
This aligns with the reasons why students choose outdoor education as a senior
subject. Outdoor education provides a unique opportunity
to not only learn in, through, and for the outdoors, but to be able to
apply this learning in real-world contexts that are relevant to them.
An example of this type of learning can be seen in our work with the Runa project,
where our students are building a pāua nursery at Warsaw Bay.
They've collaborated with scientists, engaged with council, and are working
to build relationships with iwi to support the project moving forward.
The opportunities that this type of learning provides are relevant to a wide
range of pathways. For example, our students aim to study law,
psychology, environmental science, to name but a few.
While the knowledge and skills learned in our program can contribute to pathways
in industries such as outdoor instructing, guiding, and tourism, this is only
a very narrow and limited snapshot of what our students in
outdoor education aspire to do.
My fear is that by narrowing outdoor education to be solely an
industry-led subject, students may fail to see the relevance to their
pathway, and this could result in schools not having the necessary numbers to
run courses or programs at all. Given the current number of students
taking outdoor education across New Zealand, this would be a great loss
and a real missed opportunity for our young people.
Thank you. Is it time for questions?
Yeah.
Wonderful. We have a question first from Lawrence Yunam.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much both for coming.
One of the things, thinking also talking to educators in
EOTC and et cetera, is around what it means
to be agile and flexible in
an unfamiliar environment, so your non-classroom
environment, but also being able to develop resilience skills as well as
teamworking skills. Can you talk about,
number one, how this is academic, and also how is this going to help
other forms of academia? You mentioned doctors and these other subjects.
So, if you just want to touch on that part, yeah.
Yeah. What we've found since outdoor education has
been used achievement standards, the growth has been significant.
So, that was where there was a shift away from simply being an industry-led
unit standards-based programs.
And that's attracted a much wider range of students, and I think the real
point of difference is they can apply that knowledge.
So, they could learn about the environment, they might learn some technical skills,
but they get to apply it, and that's why it's so relevant to a wide range of
pathways.
Mm.
And interestingly, our most common pathway for students are wanting to study
law and psychology.
Mm.
And they see this as a real application and opportunity to apply that knowledge.
Interesting. Thank you.
Thank you. And a question from Ginny Anderson.
Thank you very much for your submission. That's really thorough.
I'm interested to understand, there's something you didn't touch on, is
that we know that mental health for young
people is an increasingly
problematic space,
and also there is a correlation between increased use of
screen time and
poorer mental health outcomes.
Could you just speak to that, to some of what you offer, and
how that
may assist, or any views you have in that space?
Yeah, I think
certainly outdoor education provides the opportunity for
our young people to be off the screens, to engage in the real world, both
interacting with people, but also the environment.
And I think there's strong research around the benefits of that to
mental health. And alongside that,
our young people, it provides that opportunity in a world that's challenging, or
increasingly challenging to do.
I'll just add to that. I think it's also that
sense of belonging, that being in nature, outdoors, engaging
in those different variety of activities, it really supports
that bonding, that teamwork, and that sense of belonging, which
is one of those elements that really link into improvement for wellbeing.
Thank you. That's really helpful.
Thank you very much for your participation in the process.
Can I say to everyone that's been part of this,
we really do appreciate hearing from you.
It's been really helpful to have all of you together as well to help paint that
collective curriculum picture.
And as you could tell by the questions, there is interest across the
committee. We'll consider next steps.
We'll do that in private session. But we really thank you, and glad we could make
this time work.
Tena koutou katoa.
Kia ora.
Thank you.
Appreciate it. Yeah.
Thank you very much.